Torri di Quartesolo is an Italian municipality of 11,690 inhabitants in the province of Vicenza in Veneto.
"Towers" clearly refers to the defensive works erected here by the Vicentines in the Middle Ages. "Quartixolum" is older and refers to the Latin quartum milium solum, that is, a place that was four Roman miles (about 6 km) from Vicenza.
It has been hypothesized that "Lerino" derives from "Larine", a small island facing Provence in which the monastery dedicated to Saint Martin of Tours stood, or from Larin, from lares (i.e. "hearth" or "gods of the house"). In 1297 the documents report "Lerinum".
In Roman times the territory of Torri di Quartesolo was crossed by an important Roman road, the Via Gallica; it is therefore probable that it was affected by human settlements. Torri di Quartesolo, in particular, was four miles from Vicenza, hence the Latin name of the town (Ad Quartum), which already existed in this historical era. A memorial stone bearing the names of two Roman families was found in Lerino.
The towers of Quartixolus de subtus, so called to distinguish it from Quartixolus de supra which is the current hamlet of Setteca', were built by the people of Vicenza to protect the nearby city in the first municipal period - the 12th century - characterized by rivalries with Padua. The fortifications were built at the point where the Tesina river, after having flowed into it the Astico and swollen by the Tribolo and the Tergola, cutting the road to Padua "loses – as Filippo Pigafetta wrote – its name in the Bacchíglione".
Here there were one or more towers that the Paduan historian Albertino Mussato (1261 – 1329) called "Bitifredo". He speaks with direct knowledge of the fortification near the bridge over the Tesina and states that the Paduans "found an obstacle above the bridge", but finally "they took a tower in which they killed all the Scaligero (Cangrande) guards". The clash in question took place in April 1313 and it is very probable that on that occasion the Paduans destroyed the bridge tower[6].
In Pagliarino's chronicle[7], in fact, we read that "in 1315 the Lords of Scala restored the Quartisolo tower which had been razed by Paduans a long time ago and was restored so that the Paduans would not infest them with weapons and fire suburbs of the city".
The definitive destruction of the Quartixolus de subtus Towers took place in 1387 when Antonio della Scala - as narrated in the chronicle of Conforto da Costozza[8] - now on the brink of defeat and fearing not being able to defend them, had them demolished; From that moment on, we no longer talk about them[9].
Towards the middle of the fourteenth century, during the Scaliger lordship, the territory of Torri was subjected, from an administrative point of view, to the civil vicariate of Camisano and remained so, even under Venetian domination, until the end of the eighteenth century[10].
Modern and contemporary age
In the sixteenth century the bridge over the Tesina was rebuilt according to a design by Andrea Palladio and during the same century the Da Porto villas were also built.
Upon the arrival of Napoleon's troops in 1797, Torri suffered a violent sacking and - with the Department of Bacchiglione - the towns of Torri, Lerino and Marola, which until then had enjoyed an autonomous life, were unified into a single municipality. With the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the Lombardy-Veneto was created, a kingdom dependent on Austria-Hungary and with it its inevitable change of Government. The Habsburg domination lasted until 22 October 1866, the date of the Peace of Vienna and annexation to the kingdom of Italy.
During the two world wars there were numerous victims and, in the second, especially Torri and Lerino suffered violent bombings. Over the last thirty years there has been a notable demographic explosion, also due to the rise of multiple industrial, artisanal and commercial activities
In just a few kilometres, two large commercial areas have arisen: the one called "Le Piramidi" (which with its 150 shops in a single block, the department stores and the multiplex cinema has become one of the largest commercial centers in the Veneto), and the "centro" Palladio" of 100 shops, only for a few tens of meters administratively within the territory of the Municipality of Vicenza, but in fact gravitating towards Torri.
Banking services were centralized until 2017 at the large headquarters of "Centro Torri" ("Torri 1" and "Torri 2"). The two large buildings were in fact built by the former Banca Cattolica del Veneto in 1974 and 1979 respectively, then used again as a banking headquarters, subsequently by Banco Ambrosiano Veneto, Banca Intesa and finally Intesa Sanpaolo.
Hamlets of the Municipality of Torri are Marola and Lerino.